JEP-200 - Cleanup the whitelist/blacklist terminology (#357)
jenkinsci/jep: jep/200/README.adoc

> = JEP-200: Switch Remoting/XStream denylist to a allowlist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= JEP-200: Switch Remoting/XStream denylist to an allowlist
```

| 200

| Title

> | Switch Remoting/XStream denylist to a allowlist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Switch Remoting/XStream denylist to an allowlist
```

Since its early days, Jenkins has used two object serialization frameworks:
Java’s built-in API, from the Remoting layer;
and XStream, for persisting configuration and settings.
Both allow any Java class to be loaded merely by specifying its name in the input.

> This proposal switches the denylist to a allowlist of a few dozen entries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal switches the denylist to an allowlist of a few dozen entries:
```

in favor of the more general `ClassFilter.setDefault`, as is the system property `hudson.remoting.ClassFilter.DEFAULTS_OVERRIDE_LOCATION`.

The new filter has several levels of rules:

* A `CustomClassFilter` implementation may override any behavior. This is discussed in the compatibility section.
* Classes mentioned in the original denylist continue to be rejected.
* Java arrays and enums are accepted, as these are special formats.
* Java `Throwable` types are accepted, as they are commonly used in Remoting responses and it is impractical to enumerate every exception that might be thrown.
* A class defined in Jenkins core, Remoting, or a Jenkins module/plugin is accepted. This does _not_ apply to classes defined in other JARs packaged in `WEB-INF/lib/*.jar`.
* Some classes defined in test utilities, by mocking frameworks, etc., are accepted when running inside tests.
* Classes defined in a `RemoteClassLoader` (so, already sent to this JVM from a presumably trusted source) are accepted.
  This is needed at least by CloudBees Jenkins Operations Center, and clients of the `master-to-master-api` plugin if there are any.

> * Any other class is accepted if it is explicitly mentioned in a list `permitlisted-classes.txt` bundled in Jenkins core. These consist of:

Reviewer 2: revert

For years, the Jenkins project has received reports of remote code execution (RCE) attacks involving these frameworks.
Typically the attacks involve fairly exotic classes in the Java Platform, or sundry libraries such as Groovy.
The Jenkins CERT has responded to such reports reactively, by prohibiting the affected classes or packages.
That approach has proven unmaintainable, as there is a constant threat of further exploits using unexamined classes.

> This proposal switches the denylist to a allowlist of a few dozen entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal switches the denylist to an allowlist of a few dozen entries.
```

Since an agent JVM is assumed to be compromisable with a little effort by a rogue build (for example, of a malicious pull request),
the controller must apply a filter on incoming classes.

XStream deserialization is also performed when loading job (agent, …) definitions from several REST or CLI commands.
These commands require some authentication and authorization,
but it is worrisome that XStream does not require that a class implement the `Serializable` interface,
so the reserve of potentially exploitable classes is far broader.
Thus any denylist which hopes to be exhaustive must include many more classes than typical gadgets attempt to use.

(Note: Pipeline builds based on the Groovy CPS engine use yet another serialization framework, JBoss Marshalling, to save state.
This is not considered a security issue since the `program.dat` files are never read from user data.)

== Reasoning

The CERT team could continue to expand the denylist in response to newly reported vulnerabilities.
This has proven to be a significant maintenance burden, and there is little trust in the result.

> Outside security authorities have repeatedly urged the Jenkins team to switch to a allowlist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outside security authorities have repeatedly urged the Jenkins team to switch to an allowlist.
```

`plugin-compat-tester` (PCT) was also run against an array of plugins.
See the list in _Appendix A_ for more details.

If new allowlist entries are needed after release, they can be added to core in weekly updates.
Plugins can also contribute their own allowlist (or even denylist) entries for third-party libraries they bundle,
as described in Extensibility above.

Finally, an individual administrator can define site-specific allowlist (or denylist) entries with a system property `hudson.remoting.ClassFilter`.

> This could be useful as an emergency measure, allowing functionality to be restored while awaiting a new plugin release.

Reviewer: why?

Author: Just fell into my search and I though "allowed" would sound better. Unrelated to the terminology cleanup

(Such a command-line option could be noted as a workaround in a JIRA bug report by someone familiar with the Jenkins security architecture.)
`jenkins.security.ClassFilterImpl.SUPPRESS_WHITELIST` disables the allowlist, logging violations, but keeps the denylist;
`jenkins.security.ClassFilterImpl.SUPPRESS_ALL` disables them both (which is very dangerous).

== Security

This proposal is expected to strictly improve Jenkins security,
as the existing denylist is retained as a fallback unless deliberately overridden.

== Infrastructure Requirements

> A new redirect `https://jenkins.io/redirect/class-filter/` has been offered, pointing to a wiki page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new redirect `https://jenkins.io/redirect/class-filter/` has been offered, pointing to documentation for this feature.
```

Testing against this proposal also rediscovered
link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-47158[JENKINS-47158],
though sufficient reasonable allowlist entries were added to not cause regressions for Blue Ocean even if that were not fixed.

In several cases, test failures and consequent allowlist additions highlighted poor design decisions in existing code.
For example, as of
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/pull/497[PR 497]
the `git` plugin does a lot of tricky things with the Eclipse JGit library.
That is true even if you have specified the CLI implementation of Git for use in the build!
In this case, `GitSCM.printCommitMessageToLog` asks the agent to return a `RevCommit` (a JGit type),
which is serialized and deserialized, and then the controller calls `getShortMessage()` on that structure.
It would be simpler, faster, and safer to do this processing on the agent and send back a `String`,
but the deceptive ease of Remoting tempts developers to do the wrong thing.

> Enforcing a allowlist in the baseline version of Jenkins might help guide them to the simpler solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enforcing an allowlist in the baseline version of Jenkins might help guide them to the simpler solution.
```

* link:https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uQcyaaLvGFwFDe0mQ27JHeG2icdX0XfCHILbHGOtAmA/edit[JEP-200 Testing Notes (BDFL Review)]
* link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/1293[Announcement Blog Post Draft]
* link:https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Plugins+affected+by+fix+for+JEP-200[Wiki Page: Plugins affected by JEP-200]

> 
> == Revision history
> 
> * April 26, 2021 - Update the terminology in the JEP.
>   No other changes in the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

`git blame`

Author: git blame is not user friendly. And I do not want to offer commit history there, just note for major changes in the JEPs

Reviewer: Using a different term to refer to the same thing with no functional impact is not a "major change".
